---
title: "Wavetable Synth in Python Tutorial"
description: Tutorial on how to code your own wavetable synthesizer in Python.
date: 2021-08-27
author: Jan Wilczek
layout: post
permalink: /sound-synthesis/wavetable-synth-in-python/
images: assets/img/posts/synthesis/2021-08-27-wavetable-synthesis-python
background: /assets/img/posts/synthesis/2021-08-27-wavetable-synthesis-python/Thumbnail.png
categories:
 - Sound Synthesis
tags:
 - wavetable
 - Python
discussion_id: 2021-08-27-wavetable-synthesis-python
---
Let's write a wavetable synthesizer in Python!

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/zBFeT8fkjfI" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

This article is a follow-up to the [article on wavetable synthesis theory]({% post_url collections.posts, 'synthesis/2021-08-13-wavetable-synthesis-theory' %}). Here we will implement the algorithms explained there. Please refer back to that article if you find some background information missing.

Below is the listing containing a wavetable synthesizer implemented in Python.

Sound is generated by calling the `synthesize()` method of a `Voice` class object. `Voice` objects are monophonic (can play just 1 pitch at a time) and contain arbitrarily many oscillators whose outputs are summed together. We can think of it as creating "layers" of timbre. 1 oscillator = 1 periodic waveform.

`Voice`'s oscillators can be arbitrary oscillators but in this implementation we use wavetable oscillators as represented by the `WavetableOscillator` class.

`WavetableOscillator` objects have a set frequency and generate sound by looping over a wave table. `wavetable_index` gets incremented with each sample produced by the `getSample()` method. The increment depends on the frequency, sampling rate and wave table length.

The `main()` function in the listing below synthesizes a sine waveform, a sawtooth waveform, a multi-cycle waveform, a mixture-of-gaussians waveform, and the same waveform but with a frequency changed exponentially from 20 Hz to 3000 Hz and back over a time period of 20 seconds. All synthesized sounds are saved in the working directory "wavetable-synthesis-python".

Should you have any questions, please, write a comment below!

[View the code on GitHub](https://github.com/JanWilczek/wolf-sound-blog/tree/master/_posts/synthesis/_wavetable_synthesis_python.py)

```python
{% include_relative _wavetable_synthesis_python.py %}
```

Up next: Wavetable synth implementation in the [JUCE C++ framework]({% post_url collections.posts, 'synthesis/2021-09-24-wavetable-synthesis-juce' %}) and [Rust]({% post_url collections.posts, 'synthesis/2021-10-15-wavetable-synthesis-rust' %})!
